Python Wheels: from Tags to Variants [WIP] (#924)
Quansight/Quansight-website: apps/labs/posts/python-wheels-from-tags-to-variants.md

---
title: 'Python Wheels: from Tags to Variants'
published: August 1, 2025
authors: [michal-gorny]
description: 'The story of how the Python Wheel Variants were developed'
category: [Packaging]
featuredImage:
  src: /posts/python-wheels-from-tags-to-variants/featured.jpeg
  alt:
hero:
  imageSrc: /posts/python-wheels-from-tags-to-variants/hero.jpeg
  imageAlt:
---

# Python Wheels: from Tags to Variants

> 

Author: Should we also mention Red Hat here?

> 

Reviewer: I was thinking that that should go into an Acknowledgements section at the end, that's what I proposed and how we usually do that.

you need to publish multiple binary packages, with the installers
being able to select the one best fit the platform used.

For a long time, [Python Wheels](https://packaging.python.org/en/latest/specifications/binary-distribution-format/)
made do with a relatively simple mechanism
of providing the needed variance: [Platform Compatibility Tags](https://packaging.python.org/en/latest/specifications/platform-compatibility-tags/).
Tags identified different Python implementation and versions,
operating systems, CPU architectures. Over time, they were extended
to facilitate new use cases. To list a few: [PEP 513](https://peps.python.org/pep-0513/)
added <code>manylinux</code> tags to standardize the dependency on GNU/Linux
systems, [PEP 656](https://peps.python.org/pep-0656/) added
<code>musllinux</code> tags to facilitate Linux systems with musl libc.

However, not all new use cases could be handled effectively within
the framework of tags. The advent of GPU-backed computing made distinguishing
different acceleration frameworks such as CUDA or ROCm important.
As many distributions have set baselines for their binary packages

> to x86-64 v2, Python packages also started looking at the opportunity

Author: Familiar with "x86-64-v2" or psABI? If the former, then the Wikipedia page may be easier on the reader: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/X86-64#Microarchitecture_levels

<figure style={{width: 'auto', margin: '0 2em', display: 'inline-block', verticalAlign: 'top'}}>
  <img src="/posts/python-wheels-from-tags-to-variants/tag-combo.png"
    width="648" height="108" alt="A visualization of a wheel filename with
interchangeable tags. The filename consists of 'example-1.2.3', followed
by three dash-separated tags, followed by '.whl'. The examples for the first
tag list 'py3', 'py312', 'cp311', 'pp311', 'cp313'. The examples for the second
tag list 'none', 'abi3', 'pypy311_pp73' and 'py313t'. The examples for the third
tag list 'macosx_14_0_arm64', 'any', 'manylinux_2_34_x86_64', 'musllinux_1_2_aarch64'
and 'win_amd64'." />
  <figcaption>Fig. 1. Different tag combinations</figcaption>
</figure>
</div>

Where it gets really interesting is how different projects make use of various
tag combinations. For example, a single package could combine the following
conventions:

- `cp311-abi3-manylinux_2_34_x86_64` uses CPython's stable ABI (`abi3`),
  in the version compatible with CPython 3.11 or newer (`cp311`).
  It is compatible with GNU/Linux systems with glibc 2.34 or newer,
  on x86-64 architecture (all that encoded in the `manylinux_2_34_x86_64`

>   platform tag). This is the primary wheel targeting most of the CPython

Author: It meant it's the wheel you're usually want/get. I'll make it say that more plainly.

  versions.

- `pp311-pypy311_pp73-manylinux_2_34_x86_64` designates a wheel built
  for PyPy3.11 (`pp311`) versions using `pypy311_pp73` ABI on the same
  platform. Wheels like these can be used for Python implementations that
  do not support the stable ABI, such as PyPy or freethreading CPython

>   versions.

Author: Reworded the both ends, please check again on the next push. To be honest, I wanted to showcase the specific idea that you can combine (abi3 + pypy + freethreading) to get good extension coverage, but perhaps it's too detailed.

  <img src="/posts/python-wheels-from-tags-to-variants/variant-info-transit.png"
    width="881" height="417" alt="A diagram showing transit of variant
information from pyproject.toml through a wheel to variants.json. pyproject.toml
features a single 'variant' table, within which there are 'default-priorities'
and 'providers' subtables, and the latter has 'aarch64' and 'x86_64' subtables.
This structure is transferred to a '*.dist-info/variant.json' file in the wheel,
with the same objects as subtables of the 'variant' table, plus an additional
'variants' object with a single 'x8664v3' subobject. This is in turn converted
into '*-variants.json' file with the same structure, except that the 'variants'
objects contains additional 'armv8.2' and 'armv9.0' keys from two other wheels." />
  <figcaption>Fig. 6. Variant information transit between file formats</figcaption>
</figure>
</div>

This is how we arrived at a three step pipeline: with developers putting
the baseline variant information in `pyproject.toml`, this information being
then copied to the wheel itself, along with the information about the wheel's

> variant, and eventually the information from all wheel variants being combined

Reviewer: Okay, fine with me, although I personally don't see a reason to worry about that. I'd still rephrase it, since "the wheel's variant" stood out to me - how about " information specifying which variant this wheel is" ?

> variant, and eventually the information from all wheel variants being combined

Author: Actually, I merged your original version, so I guess we're good here :-).

with installing from source distributions: <q>running arbitrary code to
build-and-install</q>.

Unfortunately, an opt-in solution like that poses a few problems. For a start,
it is quite inconvenient to users. You have to realize that you need
to do something special, you need to find the instructions and you need
to install the plugins. And it won't always be obvious — you won't always
be directly installing PyTorch or NumPy, but you will be getting them installed
as an indirect dependency. You may not even realize they've gotten installed,
let alone that you missed an important step required to get an optimized
variant. Besides, it is easy to install an incompatible version, two conflicting
plugins or even reach an unsolvable situation where two different packages you
need to install have conflicting provider dependencies.

At the same time, plugin discovery was done via [entry
points](https://packaging.python.org/en/latest/specifications/entry-points/).
They were quite convenient throughout the development and testing, since they
enabled us to discover and query installed plugins without having to actually

> interact with any source trees or wheels. However, other found this implicit

Author: I'll say "variantlib" and passive voice.

the properties for a certain range of architecture levels: say, `v4` and lower.
We can't predict what `v5` will be like, and a new plugin version will need
to be released to introduce its support. However, this is not a huge problem,
as new architecture levels are introduced relatively rarely. This is what
a static plugin is — one where the list of all valid property values
is supposed to remain the same within a single version, and therefore the list
ofsupported properties is independent of what packages are being installed.

Now let's consider a different use case: we need to express a dependency
on a runtime whose version changes frequently, and is not predictable.
Said version could be `1.0.0`, `1.2.2`, `2.0.10`, `2.3.99`… We're facing
two problems here. Firstly, the list of all valid values can be very long
(to be precise, infinitely long). Secondly, we can't fully predict what
the future versions will be.

Let's start with the lower bound. If the system has version `1.2.2` installed,
the plugin needs to be declare compatibility with wheels that have a lower bound
no higher than that: `>=1.2.2`, `>=1.2.1`, `>=1.2.0`… but what is the highest

> value of `>=1.1.n` that we need to support? And what if sometimes upstream

Author: It's decreasing, so 1.2.2, 1.2.1, 1.2.0, 1.1.MAX, ..., 1.1.0 and so on. I'll try to make the problem more explicit.

releases four-component versions, like `1.2.2.1`? With upper bound, things
get even worse. Here we actually have to declare compatibility with versions
higher than the current version: `<1.2.4`, `<1.2.5`… ad infinitum.

<div style={{ textAlign: "center" }}>
<figure style={{width: 'auto', margin: '0 2em', display: 'inline-block', verticalAlign: 'top'}}>
  <img src="/posts/python-wheels-from-tags-to-variants/variant-flow-dynamic.png"
    width="683" height="486" alt="A flow chart showing interaction between
wheel-related software and dynamic provider plugins. A build backend (such
as flit_core, hatchling, meson-python…) produces a Wheel Variant, which is
then consumed by a wheel installer (pip, uv, pdm…). Alongside them, variant
providers (CUDA, ROCm, x86_64, AArch64, BLAS / LAPACK, MPI, OpenMP…) are shown.
Build backends communicate with them to validate variants, wheras installers

> do to verify whether the wheels are compatible." />

Reviewer: typo "do to verify"

Author: Also "wheras".

algorithmically to determine its compatibility.

Let's revisit the version problem. The thing is: we don't have to predict
versions anymore! Instead, we document that the lower bound value
and the upper bound value both are version strings. When building the wheel,
the plugin verifies that valid version strings are passed. When installing
wheels, it parses the values as version strings and compares them
to the installed version. In fact, we can do even better: instead of separate
lower and upper bounds, we can have a single property that is a version
specifier, say, `>​=1.2.2,<3,!​=1.7.4,!​=1.8.1`. This makes it both more flexible
and more readable.

So, dynamic plugins can do all that static plugins can do, and more.
Why do we need two plugin classes then? Why can't we just call it a day,
say that we've found a better design and go with it? The advantage
of static plugins is that they are, well, static. Their behavior does not depend
on the package being installed, they don't need to know what variants
are available and therefore their results can be reused easily. You just run
the plugin, snapshot the result and you can reuse it for any package you
install.

> This becomes especially important when we get around to discuss security.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This becomes especially important when we get around to discussing security.
```

plugin, if only to validate whether the requested properties are correct.
And indeed, the very first attempt at that used environment markers
in the `build-system.requires` section of `pyproject.toml` to specify which
plugins needed to be installed. It looked somewhat like:

<figure>
<figcaption>Listing 7. Example `pyproject.toml` with variant provider plugins selected via environment markers</figcaption>

```toml
[build-system]
build-backend = "mesonpy"
requires = [
  "meson-python",
  "provider-variant-x86-64; 'x86_64' in variant_namespaces",
  "provider-variant-aarch64; 'aarch64' in variant_namespaces",
]
```

</figure>

These markers meant that when the variant wheel was built with a property
in the listed namespace, the relevant provider plugin would be installed
in the build environment, and therefore become available to the build backend.
However, this solution did not last long. It was quite problematic to implement
properly, since [build](https://pypi.org/project/build/) deferred evaluating
environment markers to the installer, which implied that we would end up
with quite a confusing interface — with environment markers in command-line

> arguments processed differently than these coming from packages being installed.

Author: `build` literally passes the contents of `build-system.requires` to pip, i.e.:

```
pip install "cffi>=1.16.0; python_version <= '3.12'" "cffi==1.17.0rc1; python_version >= '3.13'"
```

and so on.

> arguments processed differently than these coming from packages being installed.

Author: Perhaps I'm getting too deeply into irrelevant technical details here. I think it's enough to just say it was hard.

> arguments processed differently than these coming from packages being installed.

Reviewer: Ah okay, I didn't know that, nor got it from that phrasing. I suggest either simplifying the text or spelling it out with an example like this.

]
```

</figure>

There are three environment markers available for use: `variant_properties`
corresponding to the set of the variant properties that the wheel was built for,
`variant_features` combining them into enabled features (i.e. features that have
at least one value), and `variant_namespaces` doing the same for namespaces.
There has also been a discussion of adding a marker to match variant label
specifically, i.e. `variant =​= "cu129"`, but so far there did not seem
to emerge a really good use case for it, and it was deemed unnecessarily risky,
as building the same variant with a different label would cause the dependency
to stop applying.

The discussion around environment markers surfaced more interesting problems.
For a start, it was pointed out that there could be two different types
of markers: markers matching the properties of the installed wheel (as outlined
previously), and markers matching the current system state. For example,
the latter could be used to install the CUDA plugin if CUDA is available without
actually having to publish a separate CUDA variant of the main package (think
JAX). However, this is a recent development and it has not been pursued yet.

> It was also pointed out that technically these kind of dependencies can create

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It was also pointed out that technically these kind of dependency specifiers can create
```

potential conflicts. For example, since technically a wheel can have multiple
values for a property, you could end up pulling in two or three versions
of `nvidia-cuda-runtime` simultaneously. This particularly causes problems
when creating universal lockfiles — since they need to account for all valid

> combinations of environment markers.

Reviewer: It feels like this needs a concluding sentence. Something like _"This is no different from how platform markers work however, and we concluded that it's up to package authors to ensure that there are no overlapping markers"._ Otherwise as a reader I'm taking away the impression that this design doesn't quite work or has an unsolved issue at least.

Author: Because it's not solved yet. The problem is exactly that platform markers are exclusive, whereas variant markers are not. I think "extras" are closer, so maybe that will work as a concluding sentence.

Reviewer: Maybe conclude with something like "We are still working through some of the finer points of how universal resolving should work" then?

> The problem is exactly that platform markers are exclusive, whereas variant markers are not.

I am not convinced it's all that different; it's easy to cause the exact same problem with platform markers and have an incompatible set of dependency specifiers due to marker overlap. Individual platform markers are exclusive, but combinations of them aren't.

> ## Let's talk about security

Reviewer: This section feels far too negative, as a reader I'd conclude that this is a hard showstopper. I think this section should say:
1. That we have ideas for how to improve and that the part of the design for this isn't finished yet - it's one of the things that need doing before we can consider submitting a PEP.
2. That currently the _installer_, including all its dependencies (both `pip` and `uv` vendor a whole bunch of them), are currently trusted with higher privileges, and that _variant plugins_ will operate at that same level of higher trust.
3. That that will have implications for how carefully variant plugins are developed, and that "trust on first usage" and "central vetting" are still being considered.

And conclude with something like _"We're confident that this will result in something that will be acceptable to the community after the design and its review are fully complete."_

Author: Okay, done some reshuffling and rewording, and I think I've included all you've suggested. I hope you didn't mean to remove all the paragraphs about how we can mitigate the risks — I think they have the positive tone of "there's a lot of options".

Probably the biggest problem posed by wheel variants are their security
implications. Regular wheels are installable entirely without executing
third-party code — there are no scripts involved. On the other hand,
when installing variant wheels, one has to execute third-party code
from provider plugins. This cannot be avoided without sacrificing
the flexibility and user-friendliness.

<div style={{ textAlign: "center" }}>
<figure style={{width: 'auto', margin: '0 2em', display: 'inline-block', verticalAlign: 'top'}}>
  <img src="/posts/python-wheels-from-tags-to-variants/variant-risks.png"
    width="697" height="373" alt="A diagram showing the three main attack
vectors at the three additional components of variant wheel's supply chain.
Firstly, the variant wheel can be attacked directly by adding a malicious provider.
Secondly, a provider can be attacked by adding malicious code to it. Thirdly,
one of its dependencies can be attacked in the same manner." />
  <figcaption>Fig. 10. Variant wheel supply chain attack vectors</figcaption>
</figure>

> </div>

Reviewer: I think I'd like this much better if it showed something like this:
```
Executed at package install time (may have elevated permissions)   |   Executed at time of usage of package/application

Installer + its deps                     | wheel contents
```

going to:

```
Executed at package install time (may have elevated permissions)   |   Executed at time of usage of package/application

Installer + its deps                     | wheel contents--> (arrow to variant plugin)
                                         | 
variant plugin + its deps                |   
```

The issue can be particularly serious, considering that in some setups
package installation is done with elevated privileges, in order to make
them available to all users. This makes variant providers a tempting target
for malicious actors. Three new kinds of supply chain attacks become possible:

1. Injecting malicious code into a new version of an existing variant provider.

2. Injecting malicious code into a new version of the variant provider's

>    (possibly indirect) dependency.

Reviewer: Can this be merged into (1)? Just add "or one of its (possibly indirect) dependencies" at the end of (1)?

> 3. Adding a new variant provider that itself is malicious.

Reviewer: This one doesn't really do anything unless it starts being used by an existing package.

to extend it to support dynamic plugins with minimal changes. And the sort
algorithm originally devised for the original one-value-per-property variants,
requires no changes when we introduced multi-value properties and the null
variant.

Of course, the work is far from complete. We have solved a number of problems,
we have arrived at a working prototype — but as more people start testing
the prototype against their own packages, and as more people join
the discussion, new use cases and new problems will emerge. This does
not necessarily mean that we will have to go back to the proverbial drawing
board. It is entirely possible that some of these properties can be solved
within the existing framework, much like we managed to implement a good enough
CUDA plugin without having to introduce a dynamic plugin, or that they will
turn out not to be worth the added complexity. It is also possible that
some of the existing features will be removed.

There are open issues still. There's the question of how lockfiles are supposed
to work with variants. There's the possible matter of dependencies on specific
variants. But most importantly, wheel variants opened a Pandora's box

> of potential security issues that we need to find good mitigations for.

Reviewer: I'm not too enthusiastic about this sentence either:)

Author: Yeah, I might have tried to be too metaphoric about it :-).

category: [Packaging]
featuredImage:
  src: /posts/python-wheels-from-tags-to-variants/featured.jpeg
  alt: A black steam train pulling a olive-colored carr in reverse. It has cool wheels with red spikes. Photograph by the author.
hero:
  imageSrc: /posts/python-wheels-from-tags-to-variants/hero.jpeg
  imageAlt: A black steam train pulling a olive-colored carr in reverse. It has cool wheels with red spikes. Photograph by the author.
---

# Python Wheels: from Tags to Variants

Many Python distributions are uniform across different Python versions
and platforms. For these distributions, it is sufficient to publish
a single binary package that can be installed everywhere. However, some
packages are more complex than that — they include compiled Python
extensions, binaries or even Python code that differs across systems.
In order to robustly deploy these software on different platforms,
you need to publish multiple binary packages, with the installers
being able to select the one best fit the platform used.

For a long time, [Python Wheels](https://packaging.python.org/en/latest/specifications/binary-distribution-format/)
made do with a relatively simple mechanism

> of providing the needed variance: [Platform Compatibility Tags](https://packaging.python.org/en/latest/specifications/platform-compatibility-tags/).

Reviewer 2: "providing the needed variance" is a little awkward / wordy. A minimal change could be "describing the needed variance"?

> Tags identified different Python implementations and versions,

Reviewer 2: Maybe: "These tags..." to tie it more explicitly to the previous longer name?

operating systems, CPU architectures. Over time, they were extended
to facilitate new use cases. To list a few: [PEP 513](https://peps.python.org/pep-0513/)
added <code>manylinux</code> tags to standardize the dependency on GNU/Linux
systems, [PEP 656](https://peps.python.org/pep-0656/) added

> <code>musllinux</code> tags to facilitate Linux systems with musl libc.

Reviewer 2: A little pedantically, I'd say "couple" instead of "few" and use "and" instead of a comma.

Author: Right. I originally thought I'd list more than two, but ended up with two.

However, not all new use cases could be handled effectively within
the framework of tags. The advent of GPU-backed computing made distinguishing
different acceleration frameworks such as CUDA or ROCm important.
As many distributions have set baselines for their binary packages
to [x86-64-v2 microarchitecture
level](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/X86-64#Microarchitecture_levels),
Python packages also started looking at the opportunity
to express the same requirement. In fact, the [manylinux_2_34 images are
blocked on x86-64-v2 becoming the default compiler

> target](https://github.com/pypa/manylinux/issues/1585#issuecomment-3094469339).

Reviewer 2: I was confused coming into this section because I thought it was related to

> The advent of GPU-backed computing made distinguishing different acceleration frameworks such as CUDA or ROCm important.

I think you'll want to do a little more here to make it clear you're enumerating cases.

Part if it might just be the phrasing of this, which doesn't match the style of the previous statement.

A rough example:

> The advent of GPU-backed computing made distinguishing
> different acceleration frameworks such as CUDA or ROCm important.
> Similarly, CPUs have split new features into various microarchitecture 
> levels, such as x86-64-v2. And, numerical libraries support different
> BLAS/LAPACK, MPI, OpenMP providers that are appropriate for different
> users.

You might not want to digress on the `manylinux_2_34` images, or maybe you can put it in a footnote? It distracts from the key message here.

Numerical libraries support different
BLAS/LAPACK, MPI, OpenMP providers — and wish to enable the users to choose
the build using their desired provider.

> While technically tags could be bent to facilitate all these use cases,

Reviewer 2: "While tags could technically be bent..."

they would grow quite baroque. Perhaps most importantly, every change
to tags needs to be implemented in all installers and package-related

> tooling separately, making the adoption difficult.

Reviewer 2: I might combine these sentences, e.g.

> they would grow quite baroque, and, critically, every change ...

Facing these limitations, software vendors employed different solutions to work
around the lack of an appropriate mechanism. Eventually, the [WheelNext](https://wheelnext.dev/)

> took up the challenge to design a more robust solution. For the past 6 months we have

Reviewer 2: Maybe: "the WheelNext project"

Author: Oh, I've lost the "Initiative" there while rewording.

been working hard on “wheel variants”, in callobration
with [Astral](https://astral.sh/), [NVIDIA](https://www.nvidia.com/)

> and [PyTorch](https://pytorch.org/) release team. This worked resulted

Reviewer 2: "and the PyTorch release team"

Maybe: "This work culminated"

> in today's [PyTorch 2.8 release](TODO) with experimental variant wheels,

Reviewer 2: It's a little confusing to say "variant wheels" here after "wheel variants" above, while I know you're talking about wheels that use variants, I think this might not be clear to readers. You could just say "experimental new wheels"

> and a corresponding experimental [variant-capable release of uv package

Reviewer 2: "of the uv ..."

<div style={{ textAlign: "center" }}>
<figure style={{width: 'auto', margin: '0 2em', display: 'inline-block', verticalAlign: 'top'}}>
  <img src="/posts/python-wheels-from-tags-to-variants/tag-combo.png"
    width="648" height="108" alt="A visualization of a wheel filename with
interchangeable tags. The filename consists of 'example-1.2.3', followed
by three dash-separated tags, followed by '.whl'. The examples for the first
tag list 'py3', 'py312', 'cp311', 'pp311', 'cp313'. The examples for the second
tag list 'none', 'abi3', 'pypy311_pp73' and 'py313t'. The examples for the third
tag list 'macosx_14_0_arm64', 'any', 'manylinux_2_34_x86_64', 'musllinux_1_2_aarch64'
and 'win_amd64'." />
  <figcaption>Fig. 1. Different tag combinations one can encounter in practice</figcaption>
</figure>
</div>

Where it gets really interesting is how different projects make use of various
tag combinations. For example, a single package could combine the following
conventions:

- `cp311-abi3-manylinux_2_34_x86_64` uses CPython's stable ABI (`abi3`),
  in the version compatible with CPython 3.11 or newer (`cp311`).
  It is compatible with GNU/Linux systems with glibc 2.34 or newer,

>   on x86-64 architecture (all that encoded in the `manylinux_2_34_x86_64`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  on x86-64 architecture (all that is encoded in the `manylinux_2_34_x86_64`
```

  version, for example using `py312-none-any` to designate a wheel
  dedicated to Python 3.12 (or newer — though in this case newer Python
  versions have their own wheels).

- A pure executable package (that does not link to the Python library),
  for example using `py3-none-macosx_11_0_arm64` to designate a wheel
  compatible with any Python 3 implementation on a macOS 11.0+ system
  with ARM64 CPU.

Tags clearly provide some degree of flexibility. The existing code can usually
account for future Python versions, operating system versions, libc versions,
and to some degree for new implementations, ABI changes, new architectures
and so on. But can it manage entirely novel tags?

Well, technically yes. Some use cases would fit well within the current platform
tags. Say, we could replace the plain `manylinux_2_28_x86_64` tag with a more
fine-grained `manylinux_2_28_x86_64_v3`. Properties that aren't exclusive
to existing platforms could be appended to them — say,
`manylinux_2_28_x86_64_cuda129`, `manylinux_2_28_aarch64_openblas_openmpi`
and so on. However, there are two major problems with that.

First, the existing [pip](https://pypi.org/project/pip/) code, based

> on the [packaging](https://pypi.org/project/packaging/) library, relies entirely

Reviewer 2: "entirely" feels a bit superfluous here

on enumerating all tag combinations compatible with the specific system
and comparing the tags found in wheels to that list. For example,
on a GNU/Linux system with Python 3.14 and glibc 2.41, this means almost 1300
combinations. While this is not that much, once we start adding multiple
additional suffixes, the number of possible combinations is going to explode.
Of course, this isn't really a blocker — it is entirely possible to rewrite
the logic to be more algorithmic and avoid generating all possible combinations.

> However, this is infeasible in practice.

Reviewer 2: It's a bit weird to say it's not really a blocker and then say it's infeasible in practice. This doesn't feel super compelling as written. I might just drop it? If you keep it, I'd maybe say...

> While it's possible to optimize the algorithms that checks for tag compatibility, this becomes is infeasible in practice.

Second, tags are implemented entirely within the package manager. This implies

> that for every new set of tags, all package managers must implement them,

Reviewer 2: Maybe "add support for" instead of "implement" so you're not repeating that?

implications on how they are developed.

<div style={{ textAlign: "center" }}>
<figure style={{width: 'auto', margin: '0 2em', display: 'inline-block', verticalAlign: 'top'}}>
  <img src="/posts/python-wheels-from-tags-to-variants/security-scopes.png"
    width="906" height="458" alt="Change in scopes of privileges due to variant
plugins. Prior to their support, only installer (and its dependencies) would be
executed at package install (possibly with elevated privileges), and wheel
contents would only be executed when the package/application is used.
After the change, also variant plugin (and its dependencies) is executed
at package install, which means executing contents of the downloaded wheels." />
  <figcaption>Fig. 10. Scopes of privileges when executing code</figcaption>
</figure>
</div>

There are two main risks being considered here. First, malicious code could
be introduced into an existing variant provider or one of its dependencies;
this is a similar risk to how such code could be introduced in the installer
itself. Second, a new provider could be created that includes malicious code
by design, and existing packages could start using it.

> It can be noted that these risks are similar to Python package build backends,
> that are also downloaded dynamically during the install process and that execute

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It can be noted that these risks are similar to those for build backends,
which are also downloaded dynamically during the install process and execute
```

arbitrary code throughout the build. However, this risk does not apply
to installing from wheels, and can be mitigated in environment with higher
security expectations by disabling source builds, e.g. via `pip install --only-binary :all:`.

Similarly, there are multiple ways in which the risks from using variant wheels
could be mitigated.
I have already mentioned the possibility of using frozen variant provider output
instead of running the plugin locally. However, this requires additional effort
from the user and will primarily  be used in setups with high security
requirements.

To avoid indirect supply chain attacks, variant providers could recursively pin
or vendor their dependencies. The latter option is especially interesting, since
it can be easily enforced at installer level — by forcing provider plugins
to be installed without dependencies. This way, we mitigate the risk of a new

> version of a compromised dependency being immediately deployed to end users.

Reviewer: Should this also say that we expect most providers to be small and have few or no dependencies? E.g., `nvidia-provider-plugin` depends only on `packaging`, and vendors it in the same way that `pip` does.

Author: Added.

Technically, attack surface could be further reduced by pinning variant
providers to specific versions. However, this is unlikely to be a good idea,
since it implies that the wheels for previous package versions would be forever
pinned to old versions of plugin providers, making it impossible
to automatically benefit from bug fixes and updates (say, new CPU could fail
to be recognized as compatible with an old variant).

One interesting option is to maintain a central registry of vetted plugin
providers. Since such a registry can be updated independently of existing
wheels, it can mitigate the risk of provider compromise without actually pinning
to old versions of packages. Unfortunately, the primary problem with such
a solution is establishing such an authority, and ensuring that it remains

> reliable in the future. It also introduces a single failure point.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
reliable in the future. It also introduces a single point of failure.
```

Installers could execute provider plugin code in a sandboxed environment,
with lowered privileges and limited system access. However, such restrictions
will need to be carefully considered, in order to avoid restricting the plugin's
functionality. For example, the `nvidia` plugin needs to be able to access
the installed NVIDIA libraries and query the GPU.

The more popular provider plugins can also be vendored or reimplemented
by installers themselves, therefore avoiding reliance on third-party sources.
However, it assumes that the installer maintainers have to keep track
of the plugin development, and users cannot benefit from bug fixes
and improvements without updating the installer.

> Finally, there is always the possibility of providing a better control

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Finally, there is always the possibility of providing better control
```

over variant use. For example, the installers could request an explicit
confirmation before running a provider plugin for the first time
(the trust-on-first-use paradigm), permit users to manually select variants
or disable variant use entirely. For example, a user who does not have an NVIDIA
GPU does not really need to query the respective plugin.

We're confident that this will result in something that will be acceptable
to the community after the design and its review are fully complete.

## The present, and the future

In this post, I've attempted to comment on the road the variant wheel work
has taken from the project's inception to the current pre-proto-PEP: [PEP ### -
Wheel Variants](http://variant-proposal.wheelnext.dev/).

> Necessarily, it is neither final nor complete in all the detail, but I think

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Necessarily, this story is neither final nor covers all details, but I think
```

it does some justice to the complexity of the problem space and the effort
put into developing a good solution.

> Overall, we have been following [the philosophy of WheelNext
> project](https://wheelnext.dev/philosophy_and_design_space/), and focusing

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Overall, we have been following [the philosophy of the WheelNext
initiative](https://wheelnext.dev/philosophy_and_design_space/), and focusing
```

> on providing a working solutions to real problems. I believe that this approach

Reviewer: ```suggestion
on providing a working solution to real-world problems. I believe that this approach
```

In other words, while tags serve their primarily purpose well, they don't scale.

## How did projects manage without new tags?

Still, it's not like the problem cropped up overnight. Packages needed more
variants for a while now, and managed somehow without new tags. So, how did they
do that?

<div style={{ textAlign: "center" }}>
<figure style={{width: 'auto', margin: '0 2em', display: 'inline-block', verticalAlign: 'top'}}>
  <img src="/posts/python-wheels-from-tags-to-variants/pytorch.png"
    width="907" height="286" alt="A grid-based chooser for PyTorch versions.
Individual rows provide the choice of PyTorch Build (stable or nightly),
operating system (Linux, Mac, Windows), Package (Pip, LibTorch, Source),
Language (Python, C++ / Java) and Compute Platform (CUDA 11.8, CUDA 12.6,
CUDA 12.8, ROCM 6.3, CPU). Below it provides an install command." />
  <figcaption>Fig. 2. PyTorch version chooser</figcaption>
</figure>
</div>

If you enter [PyTorch's “Start Locally”](https://pytorch.org/get-started/locally/)
document, you are welcomed with an interactive chooser. Once you select
a specific build, operating system and compute platform, you are given

> a specific pip instruction. Most of these instructions include an `--index-url`

Reviewer 2: Maybe: "pip invocation" or "pip install command"

<div style={{ textAlign: "center" }}>
<figure style={{width: 'auto', margin: '0 2em', display: 'inline-block', verticalAlign: 'top'}}>
  <img src="/posts/python-wheels-from-tags-to-variants/property-examples.png"
    width="761" height="313" alt="A diagram showing example properties from two plugins.
The 'nvidia' plugin provides 'cuda_version_lower_bound' with values of 12.8, 12.7, 12.6, 12.5, …
and 'cuda_version_upper_bound' with values of …, 12.12, 12.11, 12.10, 12.9. The 'x86_64' plugin
provides a level property with values of v3, v2 and v1, and a bunch of instruction set
properties named 'aes', 'pclmuldqd', 'rdseed', 'sha_ni' — all of them having the value 'on'." />
  <figcaption>Fig. 5. Example supported properties reported by plugins</figcaption>
</figure>
</div>

The `nvidia` provider detects the local CUDA installation and determines which version
is installed. Then, it transforms this version into set of compatible
constraints that can be used to determine whether a given wheel variant
can be installed — and if multiple variants fit, which one should be used.

For example, if you have CUDA 12.8, then all wheels with lower bound that

> is not higher than that are installable — but a wheel built specifically

Reviewer 2: "all wheels with lower bound that is not higher than that are installable" is pretty confusing. I think you should try to rephrase that in a simpler way.

Author: Yeah, I think "that do not require a newer CUDA version" will be clearer.

---
title: 'Python Wheels: from Tags to Variants'
published: August 6, 2025
authors: [michal-gorny]
description: 'The story of how the Python Wheel Variants design was developed'
category: [Packaging]
featuredImage:
  src: /posts/python-wheels-from-tags-to-variants/featured.jpeg
  alt: A black steam train pulling a olive-colored carr in reverse. It has cool wheels with red spikes. Photograph by the author.
hero:
  imageSrc: /posts/python-wheels-from-tags-to-variants/hero.jpeg
  imageAlt: A black steam train pulling a olive-colored carr in reverse. It has cool wheels with red spikes. Photograph by the author.
---

# Python Wheels: from Tags to Variants

For the past 6 months we have
been working hard on “wheel variants”, in collaboration
with [Astral](https://astral.sh/), [NVIDIA](https://www.nvidia.com/)
and the [PyTorch](https://pytorch.org/) release team. This work culminated
in today's [PyTorch 2.8 release](TODO) with new wheels utilizing them,
and a corresponding experimental [variant-capable release of the uv package
manager](TODO). The user-facing features you can try out today are described

> in [“Wheel variants” by Astral blog](https://astral.sh/blog/wheel-variants),

Author: Hmm, this sounds weird to me. I don't get "this" here, and it's a single blog post, not a blog.

> in [“Wheel variants” by Astral blog](https://astral.sh/blog/wheel-variants),

Reviewer: You had essentially "described in blog", it should be "described in this blog" or "described in a blog". You're missing "a", "the", "this" etc. a fair amount - I think because those don't exist in Slavic languages.

> it's a single blog post

inserting "post" - so "in this blog post" would be better indeed; edited the suggestion to include that.

It'd also be fine to drop the title since it doesn't really add anything, so the link would read something like _this Astral blog post_ or _this blog post by Astral_

> in [“Wheel variants” by Astral blog](https://astral.sh/blog/wheel-variants),

Author: Ah, right. I didn't get that "this" works for "the" there :-). And yeah, I'm trying hard to remember about all the "a"s and "the"s, but this doesn't always work.

As for being more descriptive, I'm trying to follow WCAG, so that all links have descriptive labels that are understandable without context.

  <img src="/posts/python-wheels-from-tags-to-variants/property-examples.png"
    width="761" height="313" alt="A diagram showing example properties from two plugins.
The 'nvidia' plugin provides 'cuda_version_lower_bound' with values of 12.8, 12.7, 12.6, 12.5, …
and 'cuda_version_upper_bound' with values of …, 12.12, 12.11, 12.10, 12.9. The 'x86_64' plugin
provides a level property with values of v3, v2 and v1, and a bunch of instruction set
properties named 'aes', 'pclmuldqd', 'rdseed', 'sha_ni'; all of them having the value 'on'." />
  <figcaption>Fig. 5. Example supported properties reported by plugins</figcaption>
</figure>
</div>

The `nvidia` provider detects the local CUDA installation and determines which version
is installed. Then, it transforms this version into set of compatible
constraints that can be used to determine whether a given wheel variant
can be installed, and if multiple variants fit, which one should be used.

For example, if you have CUDA 12.8, then all wheels that do not require a newer
CUDA version are installable, but a wheel built specifically
for CUDA 12.8 will be preferred. So we support wheels with a lower bound

> of `12.8`, `12.7`, `12.6`, `12.5`… The upper bound is handled in a similar way.

Author: I'm confused. But the paragraph before it is talking about the provider, and this is the continuation of it?

and passed them through the wheels, making it possible to generate `variants.json` automatically.

<div style={{ textAlign: "center" }}>
<figure style={{width: 'auto', margin: '0 2em', display: 'inline-block', verticalAlign: 'top'}}>
  <img src="/posts/python-wheels-from-tags-to-variants/variant-info-transit.png"
    width="881" height="417" alt="A diagram showing transit of variant
information from pyproject.toml through a wheel to variants.json. pyproject.toml
features a single 'variant' table, within which there are 'default-priorities'
and 'providers' subtables, and the latter has 'aarch64' and 'x86_64' subtables.
This structure is transferred to a '*.dist-info/variant.json' file in the wheel,
with the same objects as subtables of the 'variant' table, plus an additional
'variants' object with a single 'x8664v3' subobject. This is in turn converted
into '*-variants.json' file with the same structure, except that the 'variants'
objects contains additional 'armv8.2' and 'armv9.0' keys from two other wheels." />
  <figcaption>Fig. 6. Variant information transit between file formats</figcaption>
</figure>
</div>

> We arrived at a three step pipeline: developers put

Author: To be honest, this post wasn't really meant as a description of the "current state", but rather a curious read of how things changed over time. But I'll try to clarify this a bit. That said, I can't think of much I could do here.

work out of the box. So we went with the next best thing possible: requiring package
maintainers to specify namespace ordering in the variant configuration; after all, package authors
are in good position to specify which variants are the most beneficial to their software.

<figure>

```toml
[variant.default-priorities]
# prefer aarch64 over x86_64
namespace = ["aarch64", "x86_64"]
# prefer variants using hardware AES optimizations over these for a newer CPU
# architecture
feature.aarch64 = ["aes"]
feature.x86_64 = ["aes"]
# prefer x86-64-v3 and then older (even if the CPU is newer)
property.x86_64.level = ["v3", "v2", "v1"]

[variant.providers.aarch64]
# Using different package based on the Python version
requires = ["provider-variant-aarch64 >=0.0.1,<1"]
# use only on aarch64/arm machines
enable-if = "platform_machine == 'aarch64' or 'arm' in platform_machine"
plugin-api = "provider_variant_aarch64.plugin:AArch64Plugin"

[variant.providers.x86_64]
requires = ["provider-variant-x86-64 >=0.0.1,<1"]
# use only on x86_64 machines
enable-if = "platform_machine == 'x86_64' or platform_machine == 'AMD64'"
plugin-api = "provider_variant_x86_64.plugin:X8664Plugin"`
```

> <figcaption>Listing 3. Example `pyproject.toml` with sort order defined</figcaption>

Reviewer 3: This doesn't cover how package authors would assign priorities between variants, e.g. whether to prefer higher CUDA or higher CPU optimizations first. The text makes it appear like that should be possible, but it's quite unclear how that would look like (and also how a user would be able to override any of this, TBH).

</figure>

However, no reason to stop at namespace. After all, a specific package may
want to point out, say, that their AES-NI variant is more performant than
a fallback implemented using the instruction sets provided by x86-64-v3.
It might also be desirable reorder value; while
I immediately can't think of a specific use case for that, let's have the option

> for symmetry anyway. So while the plugins specify the initial order of features

Reviewer 3: "let's have the option anyway" - not clear to me what is being talked about here. Is this in addition to the toml config just shown, or just describing it after the fact?

Author: Uh, I feel like I've been switching between past to present tense too much.

and their values, packages are allowed to override it.

On top of that, user configuration can be applied. After all, there is still
a valid use case for the user to override the sort order defined by plugins
and packages. And since it's no longer obligatory, having that is not a problem.

## The null variant

Let's consider that you are distributing a package with three CUDA variants,
and a CPU variant.

<figure>

```rust

> torch-2.8.0-cp313-cp313-manylinux_2_28_x86_64-cu129.whl

Reviewer 3: Previously in the article, the statement was that variants shouldn't be put in the tag, so this is somewhat surprising. Of course, ultimately different wheels need different file names. But what mechanism is supposed to be used for that hasn't been covered I think (or I missed it)

If you don't have a compatible CUDA runtime at all, the fallback CPU wheel
is used. So far, so good.

However, consider a system with an older package manager version that does not
support variants. Independently of the presence of CUDA runtime, all variant
wheels are ignored there, and the CPU-only fallback is installed. However,
this is not the most optimal solution. Prior to introducing variants,
the published wheels may have featured both CUDA and CPU support (even if for a single
CUDA version).

This is where the null variant comes in. Consider the following instead.

<figure>

```rust
torch-2.8.0-cp313-cp313-manylinux_2_28_x86_64-cu129.whl
torch-2.8.0-cp313-cp313-manylinux_2_28_x86_64-cu128.whl
torch-2.8.0-cp313-cp313-manylinux_2_28_x86_64-cu126.whl
torch-2.8.0-cp313-cp313-manylinux_2_28_x86_64-00000000.whl  // CPU-only
torch-2.8.0-cp313-cp313-manylinux_2_28_x86_64.whl           // CUDA 12.6 + CPU
```

<figcaption>Listing 5. Example wheel variant filenames, with a null variant and a fallback regular wheel, in order of preference</figcaption>
</figure>

What we added here is a null variant, with label `00000000`. Since it has

> no properties, it is always supported; that is, as long as variants

Reviewer 3: Where is the lack of properties for that variant defined? Surely it doesn't come from a magic string `00000000` (and in the unlikely case that this is so, what about `0000000` or `000000000`?)

CUDA 12.6 and CPU support.

Does it really matter? Well, that depends on how you look at it. Prior to wheel
variant support being widely deployed, backwards compatibility is going to be important.
And providing a different fallback may mean the difference between installing
a 175 MiB CPU-only wheel, and a 850 MiB CUDA wheel, on a system
without the CUDA runtime.

## Multiple property values

So far, we have discussed wheels where every feature has a single value declared.
Say, a wheel that is optimized for a particular CPU architecture version,
or has one CUDA version lower bound and one upper bound. The key point here
is that for a variant to be compatible, all its features had to have a value
compatible with the system in question. This logic is conjunctive, that is representing
logical `AND`. You need to have a supported CPU, and a CUDA version that is
not older than the lower bound, and a CUDA version (the same one) that is older
than the upper bound.

CPU instruction sets are an interesting case. Each
instruction set is represented by a separate feature, with a single possible
value of `on`. If the user's CPU supports a given instruction set, it supports

> said `on` value; if it doesn't, the feature has no compatible values. A wheel requiring

Reviewer 3: This is perhaps too niche to go further into detail, but I'm left wondering if this will now by default create enormous list of cpu features in variant_features, or whether this is talking about a separate provider than the x64 v1-v4 aggregates

Author: Yeah, I think that's going too deeply into implementation details. Here the focus is on the possibility of defining properties like that. And well, technically speaking you could do either (or both), but our recommendation would be to do baseline + stuff above baseline.

However, this solution did not last long. It was quite problematic to implement
given the limited interface between [pypa/build](https://pypi.org/project/build/)
and the installers used by it.
Besides, provider plugins also needed to be installed while installing variant wheels, so it made
more sense to separate them, as described earlier in the post.

Nevertheless, the syntax based on environment markers made sense, and it eventually made
its way into the actual package dependencies. A package that previously had
to dynamically declare different dependency sets for every wheel variant,
now could instead use them to apply dependencies conditionally to the selected
variant.

<figure>

```toml
dependencies = [
    'triton==3.4.0; platform_system == "Linux" and "nvidia" in variant_namespaces',
    'nvidia-cudnn==9.10.2.21; platform_system == "Linux" and platform_machine == "x86_64" and "nvidia" in variant_namespaces',
    'nvidia-cusparselt==0.7.1; platform_system == "Linux" and platform_machine == "x86_64" and "nvidia" in variant_namespaces',
    'nvidia-nccl==2.27.3; platform_system == "Linux" and platform_machine == "x86_64" and "nvidia" in variant_namespaces',

    # CUDA 12.6

>     'nvidia-cuda-nvrtc==12.6.77; platform_system == "Linux" and platform_machine == "x86_64" and "nvidia :: cuda_version_lower_bound :: 12.0" in variant_properties',

Reviewer 3: Is the divergence between 12.6 and 12.0 here intentional?

Author: Yep, 12.6 builds are used for `>=12.0,<12.8`. Perhaps I should make it clear above.

`variant_features` combining them into enabled features (i.e. features that have
at least one value), and `variant_namespaces` doing the same for namespaces.
There has also been a discussion of adding a marker to match variant label
specifically, i.e. `variant =​= "cu129"`, but so far there did not seem
to emerge a really good use case for it, and it was deemed unnecessarily risky,
as building the same variant with a different label would cause the dependency
to stop applying.

The discussion around environment markers surfaced more interesting problems.
For a start, it was pointed out that there could be two different types
of markers: markers matching the properties of the installed wheel (as outlined
previously), and markers matching the current system state. For example,
the latter could be used to install the `nvidia` plugin if CUDA is available without
actually having to publish a separate CUDA variant of the main package (think
JAX). However, this is a recent development and it has not been pursued yet.

It was also pointed out that these kind of dependency specifiers can create
potential conflicts. For example, since technically a wheel can have multiple

> values for a property, the code in listing 8. could end up pulling in two or three versions

Reviewer 3: Stale reference. I think this should be listing 9

within the package manager weren't very flexible. They could really work only
if either the list of valid variants was largely fixed or at least predictable.
To sidestep this limitation, we need a more distributed architecture, one where
each package can independently devise how to select between its variants.
This is how we reached an architecture based on plugins.

<div style={{ textAlign: "center" }}>
<figure style={{width: 'auto', margin: '0 2em', display: 'inline-block', verticalAlign: 'top'}}>
  <img src="/posts/python-wheels-from-tags-to-variants/variant-flow.png"
    width="683" height="577" alt="A flow chart showing interaction between
wheel-related software and provider plugins. A PEP 517 backend (such
as flit_core, hatchling, meson-python…) produces a Wheel Variant, which is
then consumed by a wheel installer (pip, uv, pdm…). Alongside them, variant
providers (CUDA, ROCm, x86_64, AArch64, BLAS / LAPACK, MPI, OpenMP…) are shown.
PEP 517 backends communicate with them to validate variants, wheras installers
do to get supported properties." />
  <figcaption>Fig. Interaction between wheel software and provider plugins</figcaption>
</figure>
</div>

> While PEP 517 backends remain responsible for building wheels, and installers

Reviewer: Minor editorial comment: I'd use "build backends" as the proper name, and put (PEP 517) in brackets behind it the first time the term build backends is used.  Both because that's the more common name and because there's a push in Python packaging land to refer to things not by a PEP number.

Author: Interesting, I wasn't aware of this. In fact, I've always been using "PEP 517" as a more specific kind of backend. I'll update it.
